The Project Gutenberg EBook of A «San Francisco», by Salvatore Di Giacomo

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A «San Francisco»
       Un atto

Author: Salvatore Di Giacomo

Release Date: April 9, 2011 [EBook #35800]

Language: Italian

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A «SAN FRANCISCO» ***




Produced by Carlo Traverso, Claudio Paganelli, Barbara
Magni and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)








  SALVATORE DI GIACOMO


  TEATRO


  'O VOTO--A «SAN FRANCISCO»
  'O MESE MARIANO--ASSUNTA SPINA
  QUAND L'AMOUR MEURT....


  LANCIANO
  R. CARABBA, EDITORE
  1910


  PROPRIETÀ LETTERARIA

  _Le copie non firmate dall'Autore sono dichiarate
  contraffatte_


  Questo volume, per le Compagnie Drammatiche e Comiche,
  deve essere considerato come manoscritto, da non
  potersi cedere nè rappresentare senza regolare
  permesso dell'Autore. (_Art. 14 del Testo unico, 17
  settembre 1882_).




                            A «SAN FRANCISCO»

                                 UN ATTO





  PERSONAGGI


  GIOVANNI ARCIETTO
  PEPPE PAZZIA, _camorrista_
  DON GENNARO _'o cusetore_
  LUIGIELLO, _ragazzetto tredicenne_
  RAFELE _'o masterasciello_
  CICCIARIELLO SPINA
  FEDERICO _'o pittore_
  TOTONNO BATTIMELLE
  DON PEPPE _'o siciliano, carceriere_
  Tre _secondini_

La scena ha luogo in un camerone del carcere di _San Francesco_, in
Napoli, intorno al 1850.


SCENA PRIMA

  La tela si leva lentamente. Quando è a metà del
  palcoscenico s'ode una voce interna cantare
  malinconicamente da un altro camerone.

  _Rafele_ e _Cicciariello_, seduti sulle tavole di un
  letto, giocano a carte e fumano.

  _Federico 'o pittore_ e _Totonno_ seggono sulle tavole
  di un altro letto: il secondo stende il braccio destro
  denudato e il primo glie lo va tatuando con un ago e
  col nerofumo. Il ragazzo _Luigiello_, accosto ad essi,
  osserva curiosamente l'operazione.

  _Don Gennaro 'o cusetore_ è occupato a scrivere, con
  la matita, de' numeri in un libriccino. Siede sulle
  tavole del primo letto a sinistra dello spettatore.

  Steso sul suo letto, col capo poggiato sui materassi
  ravvoltolati, _Peppe Pazzia_ dorme. Sotto al suo letto
  è una brocca, tra un fiasco di vino e un paio di
  scarpe.

  È sera. Tutti tacciono.


LA VOCE INTERNA

    _A San Francisco_
      _mo' sona 'o risveglio,_
      _chi dorme e chi veglia,_
      _chi fa nfamità!..._

LA VOCE INTERNA DI UN CARCERIERE

Silenzio!... (_e al tempo stesso s'ode un romore come di porta alla
quale si batta violentemente_).

PEPPE

(_al romore si sveglia di soprassalto e leva la testa guardando,
spaventato, intorno a sè_):

Chi è?... Ch'è stato?!...

DON GENNARO

(_senza levarsi, mettendo in saccoccia il libriccino dei suoi numeri_)

Nu' v'appaurate, 'on Peppenié. Chillo è Totonno Sarcenella ca s'è miso a
fa 'a soleta letania dint' 'o cammarone appriesso. É miezo pazzo e fa
sempe chesto, 'a notte e 'o juorno.

PEPPE

(_si leva dal letto irritato, nervoso e s' accosta a don Gennaro_)

Quann'è ddimane ca scennimmo 'a passiggiata int' 'o curtile, nun sia pe
cumanno, me l'avite nzignà.

DON GENNARO

A chi?

PEPPE

(_serio, le mani in saccoccia_)

A stu Totonno Sarcenella.

DON GENNARO

'O vulite canoscere? (_si leva. Il ragazzo passa a guardare i
giocatori_).

PEPPE

Lle voglio di' ca m'ha dda fa 'o favore, quanno io sto durmenno, nun ha
dda cantà cchiù.

DON GENNARO

Quanno state durmenno?

PEPPE

Pricisamente.

DON GENNARO

Nun ha dda cantà?!...

PEPPE

Pricisamente.

DON GENNARO

Scusate, 'on Peppenie'... e chillo comm' 'o ssape? Ll'avite dà vuie
ll'urario... E po'... v'aggio ditto... chillo s'è miezo scemunito...

PEPPE

Nu' ve capacita?

DON GENNARO

(_appaurato_)

A me?... Comme nun me capacita?... Vuie cumannate e io ve servo.

PEPPE

Datemmillo sulamente a canoscere... ca po' ce penzo io... (_torna a
sedere sulle tavole del suo letto_).

CICCIARIELLO

Scopa!

RAFELE

Sango d' 'a morte!... N' ato asso!

CICCIARIELLO

Scopa! So' fora!

RAFELE

Aspè!... Comme si' fora?... (_al ragazzo_) Guaglió', fatte cchiú llà!...
'A che te si' accustato cca bbicino nun so' stato cchiù buono 'e fa na
carta!... Aíze, vattenne!

CICCIARIELLO

Vattenne!... (_lo spinge, brutalmente_).

LUIGIELLO

(_tornando accanto a Totonno_)

E io che ve faccio?

TOTONNO

(_al ragazzo_)

E ched'è? Mo sì benuto 'a chesta parte?... E bbì si ce fa fa 'o
spezziale!... Ah!... Federi!... (_urlando pel dolore_) Tu mme
struppie!...

FEDERICO

Mo!... Aspetta... è fenuto...

PEPPE

(_a don Gennaro, levandosi_)

C' 'ore saranno?

DON GENNARO

Saranno passate 'e sette e meza: mo aggio ntiso dà 'a voce a chillo d'
'e lupine... (_una pausa_) 'On Peppenié, ve mparo na cosa. Pe ve fa
capace a buie, 'o rilorgio d' 'e ccarcere so' chille che banno vennenno
p' 'a via. Abbarate bene: 'a matina, quanno sentite... (_e fa un fischio
lungo e modulato_).

FEDERICO

(_dal suo letto, imitando la voce del caffettiere_):

'O cafettiere...e...e...e...re!

DON GENNARO

Chist'è isso. 'O cafettiere!... E songo mmerz' 'e seie e nu quarto.
Cchiù tarde passa chillo cu 'e pizze: «C' 'o fungetiello e 'alice!»
(_imita la voce e la cadenza_). E songo l'otto. Mmerze l'unnece, nu poco
cchiù nu poco meno... «Cumme volle 'a patana, cumme volle!» (_c. s._) E
a n'ato ppucurillo, sotto meziuorno... «Pe chi tene appetito e ha
faticato... 'a marenna!...»

TOTONNO e FEDERICO

(_dal loro letto, a distesa e forte_)

«'A marenna!...»

PEPPE

E bravo! Diceno buono ccà dinto ca vuie site n'ommo assignato e priciso.

DON GENNARO

È buntà vosta. Contro 'e merete mieie cca mme vonno bene tutte quante.

PEPPE

Venite cca, assettateve. (_siede sul letto e don Gennaro siede anch'egli
sulle stesse tavole_) Tenite pe fumà?

DON GENNARO

'A pippa 'a tengo... (_la cava_).

PEPPE

Ah, be'... (_si fruga_).

DON GENNARO

Ma è bacante...

PEPPE

'O tabacco v' 'o desse semp'io... Favorite, (_gli dà tabacco da una
borsetta_).

DON GENNARO

E io ve ringrazio.

(_Pausa. Peppe carica la sua pipa: l'altro la sua_).

PEPPE

(_pensoso_)

Diciteme na cosa...

DON GENNARO

(_seguitando a caricar la pipa_)

Dicite.

PEPPE

Sapisseve... riscifrà... comme si fosse nu suonno ca mm'aggio fatto?

DON GENNARO

Eh!... mo vedimmo... (_cava un fiammifero_) Na vota 'a smorfia e
ciert'ate libbre 'e cunziquenza 'e tenevo ccà dinto... (_col fornello
della pipetta si tocca in fronte_). Ma mo... nu poco 'e guaie, nu poco
l'aità, nu poco... Basta, jate dicenno...

CICCIARIELLO

(_a Rafele, gridando_)

E mò tuorne a cuntà comme vuo' tu!...

RAFELE

So' tre punte o no?!...

CICCIARIELLO

(_urlando più forte_)

So' ddì punte!

PEPPE

(_si volta, minaccioso_)

Nu poco 'e silenzio! (_i giocatori tacciono; Peppe si rivolta a don
Gennaro_) Dunque... pe ve fa capace a buie... io stevo comme si fosse
int'a na cantina 'a Sanità...

DON GENNARO

(_accende il fiammifero_)

Be'...

PEPPE

Stevo io e nn'ati quatto o cinche cumpagne d' 'e mieie... e ghiucavemo
'o tuocco...

DON GENNARO

Be'... (_accende la pipa e fuma_).

PEPPE

Quanto... tutte nzieme... mme pare comme si fosse c' 'o peretto d' 'o
vino se fosse rutto...

DON GENNARO

Scasuarmente?

PEPPE

Accussì mme pare... (_cerca di ricordarsi_)... Già... scasuarmente...
Basta, nun è stato peretto rutto c'aggio visto scorrere 'o vino ncopp'
'a tavula comme si se fosse scatasciata na votta. Io dicevo: Ma ched'è,
chesto scorre sempe? E tutto stu vino 'a do' esce?... E chello scurreva,
scorreva e ghingheva tutt' 'a cantina... e se faceva cchiù notte, e se
stutaveno 'e lume a uno a uno... 'E cumpagne mieie... nun 'e bedevo
cchiù... mme sentevo nfonnere 'e piede... 'e gamme... tutt' 'o cuorpo...
e 'o vino... scurreva, scurreva sempe... e mm' arrivava m' pietto...
(_agitato, quasi tremante_) Io... vulevo chiammà int' 'o scuro e... nun
putevo chiammà... 'a voce mme veneva meno... mme mancava 'o sciato...
e... chellu vino saglieva, saglieva... m' arrivava 'nganna, me sentevo
affucà... (_si leva, emozionato, con le mani alla gola, gli occhi
stralunati. Totonno s'accosta e interroga con gli occhi don Gennaro.
Luigiello, a bocca aperta, impiedi, ascolta anch'egli con molta
attenzione_).

DON GENNARO

Chiano chiano... Accarmateve...

PEPPE

(_dopo un silenzio_)

Tuccateme nu poco sta mano... (_gli stende la destra, tremante_).

DON GENNARO

(_tastando quella mano_)

Avite raggione. Ve site fatto friddo... (_a Totonno, voltandosi_)
Tutt'affetto 'e neveratura... (_Pausa. Peppe si passa la mano sulla
fronte_). Venimmo a nuie... Assettateve... (_Peppe siede_). Sti cumpagne
vuoste ca steveno cu buie int' 'a cantina...

PEPPE

Scumparettero...

DON GENNARO

Nu mumento... Dico accussì: v'allicurdate buono quant'erano?

PEPPE

V' 'aggio ditto... quatto o cinche...

DON GENNARO

Nu mumento. Pricisate buono... Quatto? O cinco? Vedite... Ricurdateve...

PEPPE

(_cercando di risovvenirsi_)

Aspettate... mme pare... cinco... Sì... cinco.

DON GENNARO

Va bene, (_come parlando a se stesso, e a voce alta_). Cinco... 'A
mano... E... diciteme n'ata cosa...

PEPPE

Dicite...

DON GENNARO

Steveno a mmano deritta o a mmano mancina d' 'a tavula?

PEPPE

(_indica a destra_)

Steveno 'a ccà...

DON GENNARO

A mmano deritta... Va bene,... sissignore... E vuie ve sentiveve
stregnere nganna?...

PEPPE

E pecchesto mme so' scetato una botta e mme so' menato d' 'o lietto...

DON GENNARO

Mo'... Va bene... Ho capito tutto... Cinco... 'a mano deritta... na mano
c'afferra... (_si leva, lentamente_).

PEPPE

(_emozionato_)

E... tutto stu vino?

DON GENNARO

Russo... Vino russo... ovè?...

PEPPE

(_accenna di sì col capo_)

DON GENNARO

Stu vino russo... ca scurreva...

PEPPE

(_turbato_)

Mbè?...

DON GENNARO

(_diventato serio, gli prende la mano, gli si accosta quasi faccia a
faccia e gli dice sottovoce_)

Vo' di'... sango, 'on Peppenié!

(_Si scosta. Luigiello gli ha dato una strappata alla giacca_).

PEPPE

Comme?... (_turbatissimo_) Sentite!...

RAFELE

(_che in questo ha guardato per lo spioncino_)

A posto!... A posto!...


SCENA SECONDA

TRE SECONDINI E DETTI

  La porta s'apre con un romore di chiavistelli. Entrano
  i tre secondini. I carcerati si sberrettano, si
  allineano davanti ai letti come in atteggiamento
  militare e rimangono muti. Il tatuato _Totonno_ se ne
  sta con le braccia sul dosso: _Rafele_ ha nascosto le
  carte. _Peppe_, impiedi anche lui, rimane pensoso, con
  gli occhi a terra. La porta si richiude.

  Il 1º secondino va al muro e lascia scendere in mezzo
  alla camera la lanterna: rimane accosto al muro per
  tirarla su quando sarà accesa.

  Il 2º secondino accanto al 3º secondino aspetta che la
  lanterna discenda. Scesa che è il 2º secondino si
  fruga in saccoccia.


2º SECONDINO

(_voltandosi attorno, ironico_)

Pe cumbinazione... nisciuno 'e vuie tene nu fiammifero?

DON GENNARO

(_premuroso_)

Pronte 'e fiammifere! (_li porge al 2º secondino che accende la
lanterna_) 'On Errì!... Vogliamoci bene!...

2º SECONDINO

Eh! E bedimmece spisso!... (_al 3º secondino_) Nun tuculià! (_accende la
lanterna_).

3º SECONDINO

Io nun me sto muvenno. (_al 1º secondino_) Tira ncoppa.

(_La lanterna accesa risale e si ferma. Il 1º secondino annoda la fune a
un chiodo. Poi comincia a battere con un ferro sulle inferriate della
finestra e s'indugia a guardare per essa nella via_)

2º SECONDINO

(_al 1º secondino_)

Espò?... E che se dice?... Ce vulimmo sta ccà?...

1º SECONDINO

(_scendendo dal suo sgabelletto_)

Stevo guardanno int' 'a cantina 'e don Vicienzo. Illuminazione a
grand'imprese e sunature preparate...

(_Peppe presta attenzione_)

2º SECONDINO

Sarrà figliata 'a mugliera.

1º SECONDINO

'On Errì, ce sta nu piezzo 'e lignammo d' 'a gelosia, ca se n'è
caduto...

2º SECONDINO

Ne parlammo a ghiuorno. (_al 3º secondino che va facendo la rivista
sotto i letti_) Nuvità?...

3º SECONDINO

Zero.

(_I secondini s'avviano alla porta_)

DON GENNARO

(_al 2º SECONDINO_)

'On Errì... (_il 2º secondino si ferma e si volta_) Quanto ve sottometto
na prighiera...

2º SECONDINO

Che te manca?

DON GENNARO

Vedite... 'on Errì... Chiste 'e cumpagne mieie nun se vonno fa 'o
mal'anemo e abbóccheno tutto cosa n'cuoll'a me...

2º SECONDINO

(_burbero e impaziente_)

Jammo! Nun me fa perdere tiempo!...

DON GENNARO

'On Errì, ccà simmo sette indivirule e tenimmo se' liette.

2º SECONDINO

E che buo'?

DON GENNARO

Comme, che boglio?...

2º SECONDINO

Quante site?

DON GENNARO

Sette cape.

2º SECONDINO

E a n'ato ppoco ne vene n'ata e site otto.

RAFELE

Salute! (_ai compagni_) Signori mieie, avite ntiso? Mo vene n'ato
passaggiero!

2º SECONDINO

(_al 1º secondino_)

Jammo, Espo'!... (_si avviano_).

RAFELE

Nu mumento!... Ma comm'è?... Chesto nu' sta bene!...

FEDERICO

Ma comme se ntenne? Ce cuccammo a dduie a dduie?

TOTONNO

Io mme metto a rapporto!

FEDERICO

E che ne cacce? Chisse non te risponneno manco!

RAFELE

Fanno chello che bonno lloro!

CICCIARIELLO

Chesto nu' sta bene!

RAFELE

E contro 'o revulamento!

TOTONNO

È na schifezza!

FEDERICO

Nce avimmo fa sentì! Signori mieie...

TOTONNO

A rapporto! A rapporto!

RAFELE

Nun 'o vulimmo!

FEDERICO

Nun ha dda trasì!... (_Vocìo, romore alto e confuso di voci che
protestano_).

2º SECONDINO

(_gridando anche lui_)

Gue'!... Oh!... E ched'è 'o fatto?!... Quaccuno 'e vuie vulesse scennere
abbascio 'e ssigrete?... (_minaccioso. Silenzio profondo_) 'O carcere è
chisto e nun c'è che fa! Pe stanotte arrangiateve. Quann'è dimane chi
nun è cuntento se mettesse a rapporto, (_a' suoi compagni che hanno
riaperta la porta_). Avanti! (_escono. La porta si richiude col solito
romore_).


SCENA TERZA

  All'uscita dei secondini i carcerati si raggruppano
  tutti sul davanti della scena. Un silenzio.


RAFELE

Avite ntiso?... Che bulimmo fa?

FEDERICO

E c'avimmo fa? Ccà si fossemo tutte uno amorcunzente ce saparriamo
revulà 'e n'ata manera. Che buo' fa?... Ce vo' 'a sciurdezza.

TOTONNO

Pe cunto mio mme dichiaro 'a mo. Fosse pure Tore 'e Criscienzo ha dda fa
festa! Int' 'o lietto mio nun' 'o voglio! (_guardandosi il braccio
denudato_) Caspeta!... Federì... chisto m'abbruscia ancora!...

DON GENNARO

E che tiene ncopp' 'o vraccio?

FEDERICO

'On Gennà, ll'avimmo fatto nu risignetto. Senz'offesa ccà stanno 'e
maste d' 'e pugneture!

TOTONNO

E over'è... (_a don Gennaro_) Liggite. (_Tutti osservano, meno Peppe che
se ne sta in disparte e fuma_).

DON GENNARO

(_a cui Totonno presenta il braccio, leggendo_)

«La ronna è ingannatricio.» Bravo! E stu pugnale che bene a di'?

FEDERICO

La surisfazione per riflesso della vendetta!

DON GENNARO

Bravo! (_Che bella rocchia 'e galantuommene ca sta ccà dinto! _) (_al
ragazzo che mangia del pane_) Guaglió, mo te ne faie n'ato ppoco?

LUIGIELLO

Io tengo famma!

DON GENNARO

E te si' mmiso n'ata vota ncopp' 'o lietto mio?

(_gli si accosta_).

RAFELE

(_avvicinandosi a Peppe, rimasto seduto sul letto_)

'On Peppenié, che se dice? Ve veco 'e malumore...

PEPPE

Niente... Comme si' asciuto?

RAFELE

Aggio perzo... Avite ntiso 'o secundino?

PEPPE

Aggio ntiso. Dice ca mo ce n'allogge a n'ato.

RAFELE

E addo' 'o mettimmo?...

DON GENNARO

(_al ragazzo_)

Posa ccà!

LUIGIELLO

(_piagnucoloso_)

Io ll'aggio truvato!

DON GENNARO

Posa ccà! Mo te ceco n'uocchio! (_Rafele si accosta ad essi_) S' ha
stupetiato 'o muccaturo mio 'a miez' 'e matarazze...

RAFELE

(_al ragazzo_)

Posa! Miette ccà!... (_s'impadronisce del fazzoletto_) Mo vedimmo qua
vota te faccio scennere abbascio 'a nfermaria!

DON GENNARO

(_a Luigiello_)

Ma comme te pare? Vaie p' 'a ratta pure ccà dinto?

RAFELE

(_al ragazzo_)

Pe sta vota t' 'a passo liscia. N'ata vota te faccio nu mierco! (_mette
il fazzoletto in saccoccia_).

DON GENNARO

'On Rafilú'...

RAFELE

(_al ragazzo_)

Essì! Ccà 'e guagliune ce mancaveno! Te si' mmiso a fa 'o palatino pure
ccà dinto!...

DON GENNARO

'On Rafè...

RAFELE

(_a Luigiello, minaccioso_)

Aíze sti scorze 'a terra! (_gli tira un calcio_).

DON GENNARO

'On Rafè... Per semplice ricordo...

RAFELE

Va bene', 'on Gennà, aggio capito... Comme se dice? Chi ringrazia esce
r'obbligo... A rimettere!...

DON GENNARO

Ma... vedete... io...

RAFELE

(_gli batte sulla spalla, con aria di protezione_)

A rimettere.

DON GENNARO

(Sepultus est).

(_S'ode di fuori un fischio prolungato_)

PEPPE

(_sorpreso, s'alza_)

Nu poco 'e silenzio!... (_Tutti tacciono. Si ode un secondo fischio. Tra
sè, sorpreso_) Nunziata!... E che sarrà?

RAFELE

(_accostandosi a lui_)

Che d'è neh, 'on Peppenié?

PEPPE

(_pensoso_)

A chest'ora?... Totò?...

TOTONNO

Sto ccà.

PEPPE

Vuo' dà n' uocchio 'a porta?

TOTONNO

Pronto.

PEPPE

E si vide venì a quaccheduno...

TOTONNO

Nu sternuto. Nun ce penzate (_va allo spioncino_).

RAFELE

(_a Peppe_)

Che se dice?

PEPPE

(_traendolo da parte_)

È Nunziata ca m' ha fatto siscà... Certo m'ha dda di' quacche cosa...
(_porge uno scannetto a Rafele_) Saglie... guarde mmiez' 'a strata...
(_Rafele sale sullo scannetto e guarda dalla gelosia_) Nce affiure?

RAFELE

Nun beco niente... Aspettate... llà... rimpetto... dint' 'a cantina 'e
don Vicienzo...

(_Musica di chitarre e mandolini dalla strada: accordi che precedono la
canzone. La musica seguita sempre durante il dialogo sulla scena_).

PEPPE

(_emozionato, a Rafele_)

Chi ce sta?...

RAFELE

'A nnammurata vosta... cu Gennarino «'o pastore» e cierti sunature...

TOTONNO

(_dalla porta_)

Eccì! (_si scosta dalla porta_).

PEPPE

Scínne! (_a Rafele, che scende. I carcerati tornano per un momento
accanto ai loro letti_).

2º SECONDINO

(_da fuori, parlando per lo spioncino_)

Battimelle!

TOTONNO

Presente!

2º SECONDINO

Dimane scendete a parlatorio... Viene il vostro avvocato.

TOTONNO

Sissignore. (_il secondino s'allontana_) È passato... (_guardando per lo
spioncino_) Se n'è gghiuto...

PEPPE

(_a Totonno_)

Nun te movere 'a lloco. (_sale allo scanno e fischia_).

DON GENNARO

(Rumores fugge!) (_s'acconcia il letto e vi si stende sopra_).

(_Una voce femminile canta, difuori_)

LA VOCE, SULLA MUSICA

    _Ajemmè, che pena ca tengo a stu core!_
      _Sta int' 'e cancelle il mio beno nzerrato!_
      _So' binte juorne ca sta carcerato!_
      _So' binte juorne ca stongo a penà!_

PEPPE

(_a Totonno_)

Tu tiene mente?

TOTONNO

Nun mme movo.

LA VOCE FEMMINILE

    _Luntanamente sta voce e stu canto_
      _A chi mme sente paresse lamiento!_
      _T'arraccumanno, guaglio' statt'attiento!_
      _C'appriparato nu schianto te sta!_

PEPPE

(_a Rafele_)

Che ddice?

RAFELE

Mme pare comme si fosse n'avvertimento.

UNA RAUCA VOCE MASCHILE

    _Amice belle!_
      _Se salutano 'e giuvene annurate_
      _'e sti cancelle!..._

PEPPE

(_a Rafele_)

Saluta! (_Rafele fischia_).

LA VOCE MASCHILE

    _Anelle, anelle!_
      _So' servitore 'e st'ommo affezziunato_
      _ca mm'ha siscato!_
      _Bonanotte 'e signure 'e sti cancelle!..._

(_Una distesa: la musica s'allontana, muore a poco a poco. Pausa.
Totonno si scosta dalla porta_).

DON GENNARO

(_'E signure..._ ca simmo nuie!)

PEPPE

(_a Rafele_)

Si te rico ca nun aggio capito niente nun te rico buscia...

RAFELE

A me mme pare n'avvertimento... Nisciuno ve vo' male?

PEPPE

(_pensoso_)

E che saccio? (_siede sulle tavole del suo letto. A Rafele che s'accosta
al suo_) Che faie? Te cucche?

RAFELE

Tengo nu poco 'e relore 'e capo... (_rassetta il letto_).

FEDERICO

(_dal fondo, presso al suo letto_)

Neh, chi s' 'a pigliata 'a pippa mia?

TOTONNO

Sta sotto 'o lietto. (_accostandosi a don Gennaro che scrive in un
libretto, col lapis, seduto sul letto_) 'On Gennà, qua è 'o nummero?

DON GENNARO

'O quarantuno a morte. Si mme riesceno cierte revulette ca sto facenno,
te voglio fa vedé io chi è don Gennaro. Tiene mente ccà: 'a semmana
passata fiura 'e sette su tutta la linea... (_restano a parlare
sottovoce e a guardare nel libro_).

PEPPE

(_pensoso_)

N'avvertimento?... E che po' essere?...

FEDERICO

A posto! A posto!...


SCENA QUARTA

DON GIOVANNI, DON PEPPE «'O SICILIANO», IL 3º SECONDINO E DETTI

  Aperta la porta don _Peppe_ spinge dentro _don
  Giovanni_. I carcerati si allineano, squadrando
  quest'ultimo con sospetto e curiosità.


DON PEPPE

(_sulla soglia, a don Giovanni_)

Trasiti, don.... cumme vi chiamati. Truvativi u puosto, spugghiativi e
curcativi.

DON GIOVANNI

Mme dispiace 'e v'incumudà. Aggio lassato 'a mappetella abbascio,
ncopp'a nu scanno...

(_Al suono della sua voce Peppe Pazzia si volta, sorpreso: don Giovanni
gli volge le spalle_)

DON PEPPE

Bravu! Bonu cuminciamo!

DON GIOVANNI

Ve cerco scusa...

(_Peppe Pazzia s'alza_)

DON PEPPE

E iu uora vi servu. Uora 'a vai a pigghiu. (_esce_)

(_Don Giovanni guarda la porta che si chiude, poi si volta e si trova
faccia a faccia con Peppe Pazzia _)

DON GIOVANNI

(_sbalordito_)

Tu!...

PEPPE

(_non meno sorpreso_)

Vuie! Don Giuvà!...

DON GIOVANNI

Tu'... cca' dinto!... Peppe Pazzia!...

PEPPE

'On Giuvanne!... Vuie mmiez'a nuie!...

(_Un silenzio, durante il quale i due si guardano come non credendo a se
stessi. Don Giovanni è al colmo dell'emozione, ma cerca
padroneggiarsi_).

DON GIOVANNI

'E visto?... So' benuto int' 'a cummertazione!

PEPPE

C'avite fatto?!...

DON GIOVANNI

C'aggio... fatto?... (_lo guarda come se gli volesse leggere dentro
nell'anima. Lo sforzo ch'egli fa per parere indifferente è chiaro_) Pò'
t' 'o ddico... E tu?...

PEPPE

(_spallucciando_)

M'hanno pigliato pe suspetto... pe causa 'e nu richiaramento...
Assettateve... (_trae nel mezzo della scena una scranna. Don Giovanni
siede, come spossato_) Signori mieie! (_i carcerati si fanno avanti_) Pe
revula vosta e cu rispetto 'e tutta 'a cummertazione, v'appresento
st'amico d' 'o mio.

(_Don Giovanni si alza e si toglie il berretto e saluta. Tutti si
sberrettano_).

RAFELE

(_sberrettandosi_)

Pe parte 'e tuttu quante se saluta cu duvere.

PEPPE

É n' ommo ca se mmereta tutte 'e riguarde pussibbele e avite fa comme si
fosse i' stesso. (_Don Giovanni ascolta, sorridendo, ironico_)
Ntennimmece buono: stu signore nun pava uoglio p' 'a lampa, se po'
scegliere 'o pizzo che bo', e si vo' rialà a quaccheduno riala
schittamente a chi lle fa 'o lietto. Ce sta nisciuno c'ha dda fa
usservazione?

RAFELE

(_si fa avanti, solenne_)

Sta mmordo bene.

(_Ciascuno torna al suo letto_)

PEPPE

Dunque... 'On Giuva', ccà state int' 'a casa vosta.

DON GENNARO

(E ha fatto stu bello quatto 'e maggio!)

DON GIOVANNI

(_a Peppe_)

Ve ringrazio... E mo?...

PEPPE

Mo?... Nn' 'o bberite? Ce cuccammo. Tenite suonno?

DON GIOVANNI

Niente.

PEPPE

Embè... si vulite viglià, vigliammo. Aggio durmuto fino a mo e nun tengo
suonno manco io. Si premmettete ve faccio cumpagnia.

DON GIOVANNI

E... 'o carceriere?

PEPPE

È amico. (_strizzando l'occhio_) Mo che bene a purtà 'a mappatella lle
mmuccammo quaccosa 'e renare e stammo cchiù sicure. Nu' se' carrì,
chest'è tutto...

DON GIOVANNI

(_lacera la fodera della giacca e ne cava denaro_)

Chest'è 'a muneta.

PEPPE

Vedite... è na murtificazione!... Sta muneta l'avesse caccià semp'io...
Ma... comme se dice...

DON GENNARO

(_A rimettere_).

PEPPE

Quanno ascimmo a' llibertà...

TOTONNO

(_dalla porta_)

Sta venenno 'on Peppe.

PEPPE

(_a don Giovanni_)

Quartiateve 'a chella parte.


SCENA QUINTA

DON PEPPE E DETTI


DON PEPPE

(_a don Giovanni, brusco_)

A vui!... Favuriti... chista è 'a mappatedda. (_glie la getta sul
letto_).

PEPPE

Don Pe', na parola. (_lo trae da parte: i carcerati si fanno in fondo
alla scena_) Ce sta st'amico mio... (_indica con l'occhio don
Giovanni_).

DON PEPPE

(_grave_)

Be'.

PEPPE

Mo è trasuto...

DON PEPPE

'U saccio.

PEPPE

Nun tene suonno.

DON PEPPE

E c'aiu a fari?

PEPPE

(_sottovoce_)

Si premmettete... veglia... rummane vestuto...

DON PEPPE

C'ha dda vigghiari! S'ava a curcari! L'amico... mo' è trasuto... nun
tene suonno... Ma che mme cunti? Tu a chi vuo' fari ncuitari?

PEPPE

E sentite...

DON PEPPE

Se jssi a curcari! Ccà nu' sta 'a casa suia e particularità 'un si nni
fannu! (_fa per andarsene_).

PEPPE

(_più piano_)

Ce steva nu se' carrì...

DON PEPPE

(_voltandosi_)

C'hai dittu?

PEPPE

Aggio ditto... ce steva nu se' carrì nuovo nuovo...

DON PEPPE

Nn'arzari 'a voci! (_si guarda intorno. I carcerati hanno compreso e
fingono di occuparsi a cose loro, guardando sott'occhi_) Vuoi mi
pigghiano pe chiddu ca nun sugno? (_sottovoce_) Dammi. (_Peppe gli dà il
denaro_) Picciuotti, 'a santanotti a tutti! (_esce_).

TUTTI

(_sberrettandosi_)

Santanotte.


SCENA SESTA

  _Don Giovanni_ apre la «mappatella» e ne cava un
  fazzoletto, qualche sigaro, un paio di ciabatte che
  mette a terra sotto un letto. I carcerati cominciano a
  buttarsi sui letti. _Peppe_ rifà il suo.


LUIGIELLO

(_canta, lamentoso_)

    _Aggio fatto n'ato penziero:_
      _arrubbanno nun voglio ì cchiù!_
      _Vaco sempe carcerato,_
      _e 'a casa 'e mamma nn' 'a veco cchiù!..._

RAFELE

(_dal suo letto_)

Totò, aiuteme a fa stu lietto!

TOTONNO

(_che si va spogliando_)

Nun te pozzo servì. M'abbruscia 'o vraccio.

      _L'orologio del carcere suona le ore. Una voce
      lontana, nel silenzio: «All'erta sentinella!» Un'altra
      voce: «All'erta sto!» e quindi, fioche, due altre:
      «All'erta sto!»._

DON GIOVANNI

(_è rimasto in piedi sul davanti della scena. Ha cavato un sigaro e fa
per spezzarlo. Peppe vede l'atto. Fa segno a don Giovanni di sostare.
Ficca la mano nel suo materasso, ne cava un coltello corto e glielo
porge. Don Giovanni, macchinalmente, prende l'arma. Gli balena poi in
volto come un pensiero improvviso. Egli guarda il coltello e sorride,
feroce. Taglia il sigaro e nasconde il coltello nella manica, poi offre
metà del sigaro a Peppe che gli si è ravvicinato_).

PEPPE

(_sedendo sulla scranna_)

Dunque?!...

DON GIOVANNI

Dunque.... (_siede_). Aggio fatto 'o guaio, nun c'è che fa!... (_pausa_)
Tu mo vuo' sapé pecché sto ccà dinto... È naturale... (_pausa_)
Siente... io avarria stà ccà dinto 'a paricchio tiempo!... Sì!... È
n'anno, quase, c' 'a vita mia s'è perduta, è fenuta, è addeventata nu
martirio! È n'anno ca nun trovo cchiù arriccietto!... Ca mme so'
cagnato! E 'a chill'ommo buono e faticatore ch'ero primma, mme so fatto
'o primmo scellarato nfamo!

PEPPE

(_sorpreso e commosso_)

'On Giuvà!... Ma comm'è pussibbele?...

DON GIOVANNI

(_amaramente_)

È pussibbele... Tant'è vvero ca sto' ccà e... mm' 'o mmereto...
Sulamente... (_sorride, ironico_) mmiez' a tanta guaie ca m'hanno
berzagliato, una furtuna aggio avuta!... Aggio avuto 'a furtuna 'e truvà
a te ccà dinto... (_gli prende la mano quasi come amichevolmente_).

PEPPE

(_sorpreso e lusingato_)

A me?

DON GIOVANNI

Embè?... Nun sì nu buono amico d' 'o mio?... Nun ce canuscimmo 'a tanto
tiempo?... (_non gli lascia la mano_).

PEPPE

(_c. s._)

Chest'è certo... n'amico fedele...

DON GIOVANNI

(_sorridendo _)

E pecchesto... mme te pozzo cunfidà... E mme puo' dà pure nu buono
cunziglio... (_sempre con la mano di lui stretta nella sua_).

PEPPE

Certamente...

DON GIOVANNI

(_guardandolo in faccia_)

Tu triemme?...

PEPPE

Io?... (_emozionatissimo_) No...

DON GIOVANNI

Dunque... Saie c'aggio fatto? (_gli lascia la mano e si leva. Peppe
resta seduto, guardandolo, interrogandolo con gli occhi spaventati_)
Muglierema mm'aveva affeso ncopp'a ll'onore, e io mme so' fatto
giustizia...

PEPPE

(_palpitante_)

'Onna Ndriana?!...

DON GIOVANNI

(_solenne_)

L'aggio accisa.

(_Peppe si leva di scatto. I carcerati scendono pian piano da' loro
letti e s'accostano, intenti_).

PEPPE

Ndriana!... Accisa!... E... quanno?...

DON GIOVANNI

Aieressera... E ched'è?... Tanto te fa mpressione?...

PEPPE

(_con un grido rauco_)

Uh! Dio! Dio!... (_tremante, balbettante, barcollante_) 'On Giuvà!...
(_lo guarda, con terrore_).

DON GIOVANNI

Siente... Assèttate... (_lo costringe a sedere sulla scranna ove siede
anche lui_). Eveno se' mise ca s' 'a ntenneva cu nu mio signore... Mme
l'ha cunfessato essa stessa, all'urdemo mumento... Tu siente?...

PEPPE

Sì... sento... (_sfinito, appena puo' parlare_).

DON GIOVANNI

(_con voce rotta_)

E mo... ch'è morta... siente... mme fa quase piatà... Fuie ngannata essa
pure!... (_sottovoce, a faccia a faccia_) Stu mio signore s'era già miso
cu n'ata!... E l'antico nnammurato 'e chest'ata femmena... ch'è na certa
Nunziata... m'ha ditto tutto cosa...

PEPPE

(_scattando_)

Ah!... Scellarato!...

DON GIOVANNI

E pecché? C' 'o canusce?...

PEPPE

No... Nun 'o canosco... nun saccio niente... (_vorrebbe alzarsi: si
fruga. Ricorda d'aver dato il coltello a don Giovanni e comprende. Fa
ancora per levarsi: don Giovanni lo trattiene. L'attenzione dei
carcerati cresce_).

DON GIOVANNI

(_tenendogli afferrato il braccio destro_)

Siente... E pecché te scuoste?...

PEPPE

(_palpitante_)

Io?... nun me scosto...

DON GIOVANNI

E pecché... te si fatto mpont' 'o scanno?...

PEPPE

Io?... No...

DON GIOVANNI

Fatte cchiù ccà.... (_Lo trae pian piano a sè_).

PEPPE

Sto ccà... nun mme movo...

DON GIOVANNI

Siente... Mme ngannava... Ndriana... 'a n'anno... E... saie cu chi?...

PEPPE

(_al colmo del terrore_)

Cu... chi?...

DON GIOVANNI

Mo nn' 'o ssaie cchiù?... (_terribile, a denti stretti_) St'amico... nun
'o saie?... (_fa scorrere il coltello dalla manica nella mano_).

PEPPE

(_con un fil di voce e tentando d'alzarsi_)

Chi?...

DON GIOVANNI

(_feroce: ha cavato il coltello_)

Chi?!... Chi?... Si' tu! (_Lo colpisce. Cadono. La scranna si rovescia.
Lottano a terra. I carcerati si precipitano da' letti_).

PEPPE

Ah!... traritore!... aiu...to!... (_rantola_).

LUIGIELLO

(_terrorizzato, impiedi sul suo letto_)

Mamma mia!... Nun l'accedite!... Nun l'accedite!...

_I carcerati fanno per avanzarsi. Don Giovanni si leva col coltello in
mano, e li affronta. Peppe è rimasto steso a terra. Romore interno di
gente che accorre._

DON GIOVANNI

Nisciuno se muvesse! 'A causa è giusta. (_indica Peppe col coltello_)
St'amico ca vedite ccà nterra m'aveva offeso ncopp'a l'onore! Mm'è
custato se' carrì... (_Entrano dalla porta che si apre in fretta, don
Peppe e i secondini. Luigiello indica don Giovanni_). Tanto valeva!...
(_Getta il coltello. È afferrato e trascinato via. Rimangono dentro nel
camerone due secondini che tengono in rispetto i carcerati_).

(_Gruppo silenzioso e terrorizzato intorno al cadavere. Rafele si china,
lo tocca, si rialza, allibito_).

_La voce di Sarcenella, come quando s'è levata la tela, dal camerone
lontano, più lenta e più triste:_

    _A San Francisco_
      _mo sona 'o risveglio,_
      _chi dorme e chi veglia,_
      _chi fa nfamità..._

_Durante il canto la tela comincia a scendere lentamente. Essa cade sul
palcoscenico alle ultime parole della strofa._

_Il gruppo dei carcerati rimane in azione muta._





End of Project Gutenberg's A «San Francisco», by Salvatore Di Giacomo

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A «SAN FRANCISCO» ***

***** This file should be named 35800-8.txt or 35800-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/8/0/35800/

Produced by Carlo Traverso, Claudio Paganelli, Barbara
Magni and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
